The prosperity of the communications satellite business was accompanied by a willingness of the private sector to pay substantial sums for the launch of its satellites. Initially, most commercial communications satellites went into space on U.S.-government-operated vehicles. When the space shuttle was declared operational in 1982, it became the sole American launch vehicle providing such services. After the 1986 Challenger accident, however, the shuttle was prohibited from launching commercial payloads. This created an opportunity for the U.S. private sector to employ existing expendable launch vehicles such as the Delta, Atlas, and Titan as commercial launchers. In the 1990s, an American commercial space transportation industry emerged. Whereas the Titan was not a commercial success, the other two vehicles found a few commercial customers. However, the business was not profitable, and American firms no longer compete for commercial launch contracts, with the exception of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), which has marketed launch services using its Falcon 9 booster to customers around the world.

Europe followed a different path to commercial space transport. After deciding in the early 1970s to develop the Ariane launcher, it created under French leadership a marketing organization called Arianespace to seek commercial launch contracts for the vehicle. In the mid-1980s both the U.S.S.R. and China initiated efforts to attract commercial customers for their launch vehicles. As the industry developed in the 1990s, American companies initiated joint ventures with Russia and Ukraine to market those countries’ launchers; in the 2000s these companies ended their involvement in marketing Russian launchers. China continued to market its Long March series of launch vehicles for commercial use, and other countries, such as India and Japan, hoped to market their indigenous launchers on a commercial basis. The main competition for launching large communications satellites to geosynchronous orbit, the most lucrative commercial opportunity, was between companies in Russia, China, and Europe.